LICENÇA PÚBLICA GERAL GNU
Versão 2, junho de 1991

 This is an unofficial translation of the GNU General Public License into
 Portuguese. It was not published by the Free Software Foundation, and does not
 legally state the distribution terms for software that uses the GNU GPL -- only
 the original English text of the GNU GPL does that. However, we hope that this
 translation will help Portuguese speakers understand the GNU GPL better.

 Esta é uma tradução não-oficial da Licença Pública Geral GNU ("GPL GNU") para
 Português. Não foi publicada pela Free Software Foundation, e legalmente não
 afirma os termos de distribuição de software que utilize a GPL GNU -- apenas o
 texto original da GPL GNU, em inglês, faz isso. Contudo, esperamos que esta
 tradução ajude aos que falam português a entender melhor a GPL GNU.

Para sugestões ou correcções a esta tradução, contacte:

miguel.andrade@neoscopio.com


--- Tradução do documento original a partir desta linha ---


LICENÇA PÚBLICA GERAL GNU
Versão 2, junho de 1991


 Copyright (C) 1989, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc. 675 Mass Ave,
 Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

 A qualquer pessoa é permitido copiar e distribuir cópias deste documento de
 licença, desde que sem qualquer alteração.

Introdução

 As licenças de software são normalmente desenvolvidas para restringir a
 liberdade de compartilhá-lo e modifica-lo. Pelo contrário, a Licença Pública
 Geral GNU pretende garantir a sua liberdade de compartilhar e modificar o
 software livre -- garantindo que o software será livre para os seus
 utilizadores. Esta Licença Pública Geral aplica-se à maioria do software da
 Free Software Foundation e a qualquer outro programa ao qual o seu autor decida
 aplicá-la. (Algum software da FSF é cobertos pela Licença Pública Geral de
 Bibliotecas.) Também poderá aplicá-la aos seus programas.

 Quando nos referimos a software livre, estamo-nos a referir à liberdade e não
 ao preço. A Licença Pública Geral (GPL - General Public Licence - em Inglês.)
 foi desenvolvida para garantir a sua liberdade de distribuir cópias de software
 livre (e cobrar por isso, se quiser); receber o código-fonte ou ter acesso a
 ele, se quiser; poder modificar o software ou utilizar partes dele em novos
 programas livres; e que saiba que está no seu direito de o fazer.

 Para proteger seus direitos, precisamos fazer restrições que impeçam a qualquer
 um negar estes direitos ou solicitar que você abdique deles. Estas restrições
 traduzem-se em certas responsabilidades para si, caso venha a distribuir cópias
 do software, ou modificá-lo.

 Por exemplo, se você distribuir cópias de um programa sobre este tipo de
 licenciamento, gratuitamente ou por alguma quantia, tem que fornecer igualmente
 todos os direitos que possui sobre ele. Tem igualmente que garantir que os
 destinatários recebam ou possam obter o código-fonte. Além disto, tem que
 fornecer-lhes estes termos para que possam conhecer seus direitos.

 Nós protegemos seus direitos por duas formas que se completam: (1) com
 copyright do software e (2) com a oferta desta licença, que lhe dá permissão
 legal para copiar, distribuir e/ou modificar o software.

 Além disso, tanto para a protecção do autor quanto a nossa, gostaríamos de
 certificar-nos de que todos entendam que não há qualquer garantia sobre o
 software livre. Se o software é modificado por alguém e redistribuído, queremos
 que seus destinatários saibam que o que eles obtiveram não é original, de forma
 que qualquer problema introduzido por terceiros não interfira na reputação do
 autor original.

 Finalmente, qualquer programa é ameaçado constantemente por patentes de
 software. Queremos evitar o perigo de que distribuidores de software livre
 obtenham patentes individuais sobre o software, o que teria o efeito de tornar
 o software proprietário. Para prevenir isso, deixamos claro que qualquer
 patente tem que ser licenciada para uso livre e gratuito por qualquer pessoa,
 ou então que nem necessite ser licenciada.

 Os termos e condições precisas para cópia, distribuição e modificação
 encontram-se abaixo:

LICENÇA PÚBLICA GERAL GNU TERMOS E CONDIÇÕES PARA CÓPIA, DISTRIBUIÇÃO E
MODIFICAÇÃO

 0. Esta licença aplica-se a qualquer programa ou outro trabalho que contenha um
 aviso colocado pelo detentor dos direitos autorais informando que aquele pode
 ser distribuído sob as condições desta Licença Pública Geral. O "Programa"
 abaixo refere-se a qualquer programa ou trabalho e "trabalho baseado no
 Programa" significa tanto o Programa em si, como quaisquer trabalhos derivados,
 de acordo com a lei de direitos de autor: isto quer dizer um trabalho que
 contenha o Programa ou parte dele, tanto na forma original ou modificado, e/ou
 tradução para outros idiomas. ***(Doravante o termo "modificação" ou sinónimos
 serão usados livremente.) *** Cada licenciado é mencionado como "você".

 Actividades outras que a cópia, a distribuição e modificação não estão cobertas
 por esta Licença; elas estão fora do seu âmbito. O acto de executar o Programa
 não é restringido e o resultado do Programa é coberto pela licença apenas se o
 seu conteúdo contenha trabalhos baseados no Programa (independentemente de
 terem sido gerados pela execução do Programa). Este último ponto depende das
 funcionalidades específicas de cada programa.

 1. Você pode copiar e distribuir cópias fiéis do código-fonte do Programa da
 mesma forma que você o recebeu, usando qualquer meio, deste que inclua em cada
 cópia um aviso de direitos de autor e uma declaração de inexistência de
 garantias; mantenha intactos todos os avisos que se referem a esta Licença e à
 ausência total de garantias; e forneça aos destinatários do Programa uma cópia
 desta Licença, em conjunto com o Programa.

 Você pode cobrar pelo acto físico de transferir uma cópia e pode,
 opcionalmente, oferecer garantias em troca de pagamento.

 2. Você pode modificar sua cópia ou cópias do Programa, ou qualquer parte dele,
 gerando assim um trabalho derivado, copiar e distribuir essas modificações ou
 trabalhos sob os termos da secção 1 acima, desde que se enquadre nas seguintes
 condições:

 a) Os arquivos modificados devem conter avisos proeminentes afirmando que você
 alterou os arquivos, incluindo a data de qualquer alteração.

 b) Deve ser licenciado, sob os termos desta Licença, integralmente e sem custo
 algum para terceiros, qualquer trabalho seu que contenha ou seja derivado do
 Programa ou de parte dele.

 c) Se qualquer programa modificado, quando executado, lê normalmente comandos
 interactivamente, tem que fazer com que, quando iniciado o uso interactivo,
 seja impresso ou mostrado um anúncio de que não há qualquer garantia (ou então
 que você fornece a garantia) e que os utilizadores podem redistribuir o
 programa sob estas condições, ainda informando os utilizadores como consultar
 uma cópia desta Licença. (Excepção: se o Programa em si é interactivo mas
 normalmente não imprime estes tipos de anúncios, então o seu trabalho derivado
 não precisa imprimir um anúncio.)

 Estas exigências aplicam-se ao trabalho derivado como um todo. Se secções
 identificáveis de tal trabalho não são derivadas do Programa, e podem ser
 razoavelmente consideradas trabalhos independentes e separados por si só, então
 esta Licença, e seus termos, não se aplicam a estas secções caso as distribua
 como um trabalho separado. Mas se distribuir as mesmas secções como parte de um
 todo que constitui trabalho derivado, a distribuição como um todo tem que
 enquadrar-se nos termos desta Licença, cujos direitos para outros licenciados
 se estendem ao todo, portanto também para toda e qualquer parte do programa,
 independente de quem a escreveu.

 Desta forma, esta secção não tem a intenção de reclamar direitos ou contestar
 seus direitos sobre o trabalho escrito completamente por si; ao invés disso, a
 intenção é a de exercitar o direito de controlar a distribuição de trabalhos,
 derivados ou colectivos, baseados no Programa.

 Adicionalmente, a mera adição ao Programa (ou a um trabalho derivado deste) de
 um outro trabalho num volume de armazenamento ou meio de distribuição não faz
 esse outro trabalho seja incluído no âmbito desta Licença.

 3. Você pode copiar e distribuir o Programa (ou trabalho derivado, conforme
 descrito na Secção 2) em código-objecto ou em forma executável sob os termos
 das Secções 1 e 2 acima, desde que cumpra uma das seguintes alienas:

 a) O faça acompanhar com o código-fonte completo e em forma acessível por
 máquinas, código esse que tem que ser distribuído sob os termos das Secções 1 e
 2 acima e em meio normalmente utilizado para o intercâmbio de software; ou,

 b) O acompanhe com uma oferta escrita, válida por pelo menos três anos, de
 fornecer a qualquer um, com um custo não superior ao custo de distribuição
 física do material, uma cópia do código-fonte completo e em forma acessível por
 máquinas,  código esse que tem que ser distribuído sob os termos das Secções 1
 e 2 acima e em meio normalmente utilizado para o intercâmbio de software; ou,

 c) O acompanhe com a informação que você recebeu em relação à oferta de
 distribuição do código-fonte correspondente. (Esta alternativa é permitida
 somente em distribuição não comerciais, e apenas se você recebeu o programa em
 forma de código-objecto ou executável, com uma oferta de acordo com a Subsecção
 b) acima.)

 O código-fonte de um trabalho corresponde à forma de trabalho preferida para se
 fazer modificações. Para um trabalho em forma executável, o código-fonte
 completo significa todo o código-fonte de todos os módulos que ele contém, mais
 quaisquer arquivos de definição de "interface", mais os "scripts" utilizados
 para se controlar a compilação e a instalação do executável. Contudo, como
 excepção especial, o código-fonte distribuído não precisa incluir qualquer
 componente normalmente distribuído (tanto em forma original quanto binária) com
 os maiores componentes (o compilador, o "kernel" etc.) do sistema operativo sob
 o qual o executável funciona, a menos que o componente em si acompanhe o
 executável.

 Se a distribuição do executável ou código-objecto é feita através da oferta de
 acesso a cópias em algum lugar, então oferecer o acesso equivalente a cópia, no
 mesmo lugar, do código-fonte, equivale à distribuição do código-fonte, mesmo
 que terceiros não sejam compelidos a copiar o código-fonte em conjunto com o
 código-objecto.

 4. Você não pode copiar, modificar, sublicenciar ou distribuir o Programa,
 excepto de acordo com as condições expressas nesta Licença. Qualquer outra
 tentativa de cópia, modificação, sublicenciamento ou distribuição do Programa
 não é valida, e cancelará automaticamente os direitos que lhe foram fornecidos
 por esta Licença. No entanto, terceiros que receberam de si cópias ou direitos,
 fornecidos sob os termos desta Licença, não terão a sua licença terminada,
 desde que permaneçam em total concordância com ela.

 5. Você não é obrigado a aceitar esta Licença já que não a assinou. No entanto,
 nada mais lhe dará permissão para modificar ou distribuir o Programa ou
 trabalhos derivados deste. Estas acções são proibidas por lei, caso você não
 aceite esta Licença. Desta forma, ao modificar ou distribuir o Programa (ou
 qualquer trabalho derivado do Programa), você estará a indicar a sua total
 concordância com os termos desta Licença, nomeadamente os termos e condições
 para copiar, distribuir ou modificar o Programa, ou trabalhos baseados nele.

 6. Cada vez que redistribuir o Programa (ou qualquer trabalho derivado), os
 destinatários adquirirão automaticamente do autor original uma licença para
 copiar, distribuir ou modificar o Programa, sujeitos a estes termos e
 condições. Você não poderá impor aos destinatários qualquer outra restrição ao
 exercício dos direitos então adquiridos. Você não é responsável em garantir a
 concordância de terceiros a esta Licença.

 7. Se, em consequência de decisões judiciais ou alegações de violação de
 patentes ou quaisquer outras razões (não limitadas a assuntos relacionados a
 patentes), lhe forem impostas condições (por ordem judicial, acordos ou outras
 formas) e que contradigam as condições desta Licença, elas não o livram das
 condições desta Licença. Se não puder distribuir de forma a satisfazer
 simultaneamente suas obrigações para com esta Licença e para com as outras
 obrigações pertinentes, então como consequência você não poderá distribuir o
 Programa. Por exemplo, se uma licença de patente não permitir a redistribuição,
 sem obrigação ao pagamento de "royalties", por todos aqueles que receberem
 cópias directa ou indirectamente de si, então a única forma de você satisfazer
 a licença de patente e a esta Licença seria a de desistir completamente de
 distribuir o Programa.

 Se qualquer parte desta secção for considerada inválida ou não aplicável em
 qualquer circunstância particular, o restante da secção aplica-se, e a secção
 como um todo aplicar-se-á em outras circunstâncias.

 O propósito desta secção não é o de induzi-lo a infringir quaisquer patentes ou
 reivindicação de direitos de propriedade de outros, ou a contestar a validade
 de quaisquer dessas reivindicações; esta secção tem como único propósito
 proteger a integridade dos sistemas de distribuição de software livre, que é
 implementado pela prática de licenças públicas. Várias pessoas têm contribuído
 generosamente e em grande escala para software distribuído usando este sistema,
 na certeza de que sua aplicação é feita de forma consistente; fica a critério
 do autor/doador decidir se ele ou ela está disposto(a) a distribuir software
 utilizando outro sistema, e um outro detentor de uma licença não pode impor
 esta ou qualquer outra escolha.

 Esta secção destina-se a tornar bastante claro o que se acredita ser
 consequência do restante desta Licença.

 8. Se a distribuição e/ou uso do Programa são restringidos em certos países por
 patentes ou direitos de autor, o detentor dos direitos de autor original, que
 colocou o Programa sob esta Licença, pode incluir uma limitação geográfica de
 distribuição, excluindo aqueles países, de forma a apenas permitir a
 distribuição nos países não excluídos. Nestes casos, esta Licença incorpora a
 limitação como se a mesma constasse escrita nesta Licença.

 9. A Free Software Foundation pode publicar versões revistas e/ou novas da
 Licença Pública Geral de tempos em tempos. Estas novas versões serão similares
 em espírito à versão actual, mas podem diferir em detalhes que resolvam novos
 problemas ou situações.

 A cada versão é dada um número distinto. Se o Programa especifica um número de
 versão específico desta Licença que se aplica a ele e a "qualquer nova versão",
 você tem a opção de aceitar os termos e condições daquela versão ou de qualquer
 outra versão posterior publicada pela Free Software Foundation. Se o programa
 não especificar um número de versão desta Licença, poderá escolher qualquer
 versão publicada pela Free Software Foundation.

 10. Se você pretende incorporar partes do Programa em outros programas livres
 cujas condições de distribuição sejam diferentes, escreva ao autor e solicite
 permissão para tal. Para o software que a Free Software Foundation detém
 direitos de autor, escreva à Free Software Foundation; às vezes nós permitimos
 excepções para estes casos. A nossa decisão será guiada por dois objectivos: o
 de preservar a condição de liberdade de todas os trabalhos derivados do nosso
 software livre, e o de promover a partilha e reutilização de software de um
 modo geral.


AUSÊNCIA DE GARANTIAS

 11. UMA VEZ QUE O PROGRAMA É LICENCIADO SEM ÓNUS, NÃO HÁ QUALQUER
 GARANTIA PARA O PROGRAMA, NA EXTENSÃO PERMITIDA PELAS LEIS
 APLICÁVEIS. EXCEPTO QUANDO EXPRESSO DE FORMA ESCRITA, OS
 DETENTORES DOS DIREITOS AUTORAIS E/OU TERCEIROS DISPONIBILIZAM O
 PROGRAMA "COMO ESTA", SEM QUALQUER TIPO DE GARANTIAS, EXPRESSAS
 OU IMPLÍCITAS, INCLUINDO, MAS NÃO LIMITADO A, ÀS GARANTIAS
 IMPLÍCITAS DE COMERCIALIZAÇÃO E ÀS DE ADEQUAÇÃO A QUALQUER
 PROPÓSITO. O RISCO COM A QUALIDADE E DESEMPENHO DO PROGRAMA
 É TOTALMENTE SEU. CASO O PROGRAMA SE REVELE DEFEITUOSO, VOCÊ
 ASSUME OS CUSTOS DE TODAS AS MANUTENÇÕES, REPAROS E
 CORRECÇÕES QUE JULGUE NECESSÁRIAS.

 12. EM NENHUMA CIRCUNSTÂNCIA, A MENOS QUE EXIGIDO PELAS LEIS
 APLICÁVEIS OU ACORDO ESCRITO, OS DETENTORES DOS DIREITOS DE
 AUTOR, OU QUALQUER OUTRA PARTE QUE POSSA MODIFICAR E/OU
 REDISTRIBUIR O PROGRAMA CONFORME PERMITIDO ACIMA, SERÃO
 RESPONSABILIZADOS POR SI OU POR SEU INTERMÉDIO, POR DANOS,
 INCLUINDO QUALQUER DANO EM GERAL, ESPECIAL, ACIDENTAL OU
 CONSEQUENTE, RESULTANTES DO USO OU INCAPACIDADE DE USO DO
 PROGRAMA (INCLUINDO, MAS NÃO LIMITADO A, A PERDA DE DADOS OU
 DADOS TORNADOS INCORRECTOS, OU PERDAS SOFRIDAS POR SI OU POR
 OUTRAS PARTES, OU FALHAS DO PROGRAMA AO OPERAR COM QUALQUER
 OUTRO PROGRAMA), MESMO QUE TAIS DETENTORES OU PARTES
 TENHAM SIDO AVISADOS DA POSSIBILIDADE DE TAIS DANOS.

FIM DOS TERMOS E CONDIÇÕES

---------------------



Como Aplicar Estes Termos aos Seus Novos Programas

 Se você desenvolver um novo programa, e quer que ele seja utilizado amplamente
 pelo público, a melhor forma de alcançar este objectivo é torná-lo software
 livre, software que qualquer um pode redistribuir e alterar, sob estes termos.

 Para tal, inclua os seguintes avisos no programa. É mais seguro inclui-los logo
 no início de cada arquivo-fonte para reforçar mais efectivamente a inexistência
 de garantias; e cada arquivo deve conter pelo menos a linha de "copyright" e
 uma indicação sobre onde encontrar o texto completo da licença.

Exemplo:

 <uma linha que forneça o nome do programa e uma ideia do que ele faz.>
 Copyright (C) <ano> <nome do autor>

 Este programa é software livre; você pode redistribuí-lo e/ou modificá-lo sob
 os termos da Licença Pública Geral GNU, conforme publicada pela Free Software
 Foundation; tanto a versão 2 da Licença como (a seu critério) qualquer versão
 mais actual.

 Este programa é distribuído na expectativa de ser útil, mas SEM QUALQUER
 GARANTIA; incluindo as garantias implícitas de COMERCIALIZAÇÃO ou de
 ADEQUAÇÃO A QUALQUER PROPÓSITO EM PARTICULAR. Consulte a
 Licença Pública Geral GNU para obter mais detalhes.

 Você deve ter recebido uma cópia da Licença Pública Geral GNU em conjunto com
 este programa; caso contrário, escreva para a Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.



 Inclua também informações sobre como contactá-lo electronicamente e por carta.

 Se o programa é interactivo, faça-o mostrar um aviso breve como este, ao
 iniciar um modo interactivo:

Exemplo:


 Gnomovision versão 69, Copyright (C) <ano> <nome do autor> O Gnomovision não
 possui QUALQUER GARANTIA; para obter mais detalhes escreva `mostrar g'. É
 software livre e você está convidado a redistribui-lo sob certas condições;
 digite `mostrar c' para obter detalhes.

 Os comandos hipotéticos `mostrar g e `mostrar c' devem mostrar as partes
 apropriadas da Licença Pública Geral. É claro que os comandos que escolher usar
 podem ser activados de outra forma que `mostrar g' e `mostrar c'; podem ser
 cliques do rato ou itens de um menu -- o que melhor se adequar ao seu programa.

 Você também deve obter da sua entidade patronal (se  trabalhar como
 programador) ou escola, conforme o caso, uma "declaração de ausência de
 direitos autorais" sobre o programa, se necessário. Aqui está um exemplo:


 Neoscopio Lda., declara a ausência de quaisquer direitos autorais sobre o
 programa `Gnomovision' escrito por Jorge Andrade.

10 de Junho de 2004
 <assinatura de Miguel Nunes>,

Miguel Nunes, Gerente de Neoscopio Lda.



 Esta Licença Pública Geral não permite incorporar o seu programa em programas
 proprietários. Se o seu programa é uma biblioteca de sub-rotinas, poderá
 considerar mais útil permitir ligar aplicações proprietárias com a biblioteca.
 Se é isto que pretende, use a Licença Pública Geral de Bibliotecas GNU,
 em vez desta Licença.



 ===============================================================



		    GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
		       Version 2, June 1991

 Copyright (C) 1989, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
                       59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
 Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
 of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

			    Preamble

  The licenses for most software are designed to take away your
freedom to share and change it.  By contrast, the GNU General Public
License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free
software--to make sure the software is free for all its users.  This
General Public License applies to most of the Free Software
Foundation's software and to any other program whose authors commit to
using it.  (Some other Free Software Foundation software is covered by
the GNU Library General Public License instead.)  You can apply it to
your programs, too.

  When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not
price.  Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you
have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for
this service if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it
if you want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it
in new free programs; and that you know you can do these things.

  To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid
anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights.
These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you
distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it.

  For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether
gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that
you have.  You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the
source code.  And you must show them these terms so they know their
rights.

  We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software, and
(2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy,
distribute and/or modify the software.

  Also, for each author's protection and ours, we want to make certain
that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free
software.  If the software is modified by someone else and passed on, we
want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original, so
that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original
authors' reputations.

  Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software
patents.  We wish to avoid the danger that redistributors of a free
program will individually obtain patent licenses, in effect making the
program proprietary.  To prevent this, we have made it clear that any
patent must be licensed for everyone's free use or not licensed at all.

  The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

		    GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
   TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION

  0. This License applies to any program or other work which contains
a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may be distributed
under the terms of this General Public License.  The "Program", below,
refers to any such program or work, and a "work based on the Program"
means either the Program or any derivative work under copyright law:
that is to say, a work containing the Program or a portion of it,
either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated into another
language.  (Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in
the term "modification".)  Each licensee is addressed as "you".

Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not
covered by this License; they are outside its scope.  The act of
running the Program is not restricted, and the output from the Program
is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the
Program (independent of having been made by running the Program).
Whether that is true depends on what the Program does.

  1. You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program's
source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you
conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate
copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the
notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty;
and give any other recipients of the Program a copy of this License
along with the Program.

You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and
you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee.

  2. You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any portion
of it, thus forming a work based on the Program, and copy and
distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1
above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:

    a) You must cause the modified files to carry prominent notices
    stating that you changed the files and the date of any change.

    b) You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that in
    whole or in part contains or is derived from the Program or any
    part thereof, to be licensed as a whole at no charge to all third
    parties under the terms of this License.

    c) If the modified program normally reads commands interactively
    when run, you must cause it, when started running for such
    interactive use in the most ordinary way, to print or display an
    announcement including an appropriate copyright notice and a
    notice that there is no warranty (or else, saying that you provide
    a warranty) and that users may redistribute the program under
    these conditions, and telling the user how to view a copy of this
    License.  (Exception: if the Program itself is interactive but
    does not normally print such an announcement, your work based on
    the Program is not required to print an announcement.)

These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole.  If
identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Program,
and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in
themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those
sections when you distribute them as separate works.  But when you
distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based
on the Program, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of
this License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the
entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it.

Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest
your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to
exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or
collective works based on the Program.

In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Program
with the Program (or with a work based on the Program) on a volume of
a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under
the scope of this License.

  3. You may copy and distribute the Program (or a work based on it,
under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of
Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the following:

    a) Accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable
    source code, which must be distributed under the terms of Sections
    1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange; or,

    b) Accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three
    years, to give any third party, for a charge no more than your
    cost of physically performing source distribution, a complete
    machine-readable copy of the corresponding source code, to be
    distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium
    customarily used for software interchange; or,

    c) Accompany it with the information you received as to the offer
    to distribute corresponding source code.  (This alternative is
    allowed only for noncommercial distribution and only if you
    received the program in object code or executable form with such
    an offer, in accord with Subsection b above.)

The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for
making modifications to it.  For an executable work, complete source
code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any
associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to
control compilation and installation of the executable.  However, as a
special exception, the source code distributed need not include
anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary
form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the
operating system on which the executable runs, unless that component
itself accompanies the executable.

If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering
access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent
access to copy the source code from the same place counts as
distribution of the source code, even though third parties are not
compelled to copy the source along with the object code.

  4. You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Program
except as expressly provided under this License.  Any attempt
otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Program is
void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License.
However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under
this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.

  5. You are not required to accept this License, since you have not
signed it.  However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or
distribute the Program or its derivative works.  These actions are
prohibited by law if you do not accept this License.  Therefore, by
modifying or distributing the Program (or any work based on the
Program), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and
all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying
the Program or works based on it.

  6. Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on the
Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the
original licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program subject to
these terms and conditions.  You may not impose any further
restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein.
You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties to
this License.

  7. If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of patent
infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues),
conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or
otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not
excuse you from the conditions of this License.  If you cannot
distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this
License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you
may not distribute the Program at all.  For example, if a patent
license would not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Program by
all those who receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then
the only way you could satisfy both it and this License would be to
refrain entirely from distribution of the Program.

If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under
any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to
apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other
circumstances.

It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any
patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any
such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the
integrity of the free software distribution system, which is
implemented by public license practices.  Many people have made
generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed
through that system in reliance on consistent application of that
system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing
to distribute software through any other system and a licensee cannot
impose that choice.

This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to
be a consequence of the rest of this License.

  8. If the distribution and/or use of the Program is restricted in
certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the
original copyright holder who places the Program under this License
may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding
those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among
countries not thus excluded.  In such case, this License incorporates
the limitation as if written in the body of this License.

  9. The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions
of the General Public License from time to time.  Such new versions will
be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to
address new problems or concerns.

Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If the Program
specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and "any
later version", you have the option of following the terms and conditions
either of that version or of any later version published by the Free
Software Foundation.  If the Program does not specify a version number of
this License, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software
Foundation.

  10. If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other free
programs whose distribution conditions are different, write to the author
to ask for permission.  For software which is copyrighted by the Free
Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we sometimes
make exceptions for this.  Our decision will be guided by the two goals
of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free software and
of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally.

			    NO WARRANTY

  11. BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO
WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE
LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT
HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS"
WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED,
INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE
ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS
WITH YOU.  SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE
COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

  12. IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN
WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY
MODIFY AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL,
INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR
INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS
OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED
BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE
WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY
HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

		     END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS

	    How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs

  If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the greatest
possible use to the public, the best way to achieve this is to make it
free software which everyone can redistribute and change under these terms.

  To do so, attach the following notices to the program.  It is safest
to attach them to the start of each source file to most effectively
convey the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least
the "copyright" line and a pointer to where the full notice is found.

    <one line to give the program's name and a brief idea of what it does.>
    Copyright (C) <year>  <name of author>

    This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
    the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
    (at your option) any later version.

    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
    GNU General Public License for more details.

    You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
    along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
    Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA


Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper mail.

If the program is interactive, make it output a short notice like this
when it starts in an interactive mode:

    Gnomovision version 69, Copyright (C) year name of author
    Gnomovision comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details type `show w'.
    This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it
    under certain conditions; type `show c' for details.

The hypothetical commands `show w' and `show c' should show the appropriate
parts of the General Public License.  Of course, the commands you use may
be called something other than `show w' and `show c'; they could even be
mouse-clicks or menu items--whatever suits your program.

You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or your
school, if any, to sign a "copyright disclaimer" for the program, if
necessary.  Here is a sample; alter the names:

  Yoyodyne, Inc., hereby disclaims all copyright interest in the program
  `Gnomovision' (which makes passes at compilers) written by James Hacker.

  <signature of Ty Coon>, 1 April 1989
  Ty Coon, President of Vice

This General Public License does not permit incorporating your program into
proprietary programs.  If your program is a subroutine library, you may
consider it more useful to permit linking proprietary applications with the
library.  If this is what you want to do, use the GNU Library General
Public License instead of this License.
